the camera angle is gonna be a little
strange on this one sorry I'm on the
sleeper train from London to Scotland
there is not much room in here there's
someone next door so I've got to be
quiet tonight this train is going to
rolls with English Midlands and up from
northern England and while we're on our
way I would like to tell you the story
the biggest online hits I've ever been
involved
the north/south divide is an important
thing in English culture if your
northern you suppose to be proud of it
industry just all the hard knocks saying
bath and stir and baths if you're
southern you supposed to be proud of not
being northern I guess she'll see it in
the northerners who moved down to London
in the south for jobs complaining about
the price of everything down there about
how he taught me updates and chips and
gravy and about how for some reason the
locals insist on wearing a big coat
outside when it's cold I'm most of up in
the Midland so both sides hate me I
brought my big coat my point is the idea
of being northern or not northern is
relatable for a lot of the people in
this country in 2013 I was working for a
website called us-versus-them and my job
was to make web toys and games quickly
so one of our team came up with an idea
for how northern are you quiz how office
jumped on it now occasionally you might
get an idea that arrives fully formed in
your head like a bolt from the blue a
complete plan unfolding in your brain
and generally I get those ideas when I'm
in the shower
but I'm not really thinking about
anything when my mind's got time to
start putting together everything I've
been thinking about over the last day
and it's usually a really good plan to
act on those ideas if you're lucky
enough to get one but as far as I can
remember this was not one of those ideas
we workshop this one in the office all
the team suggested questions we tested
them on the folks who are around us and
rather than just using a regular
question answer system for the quiz I
coded up a full-screen game called the
North ometer that will give you a big
arrow that swung north and south
depending on the answers to your
questions another one of the team
suggested that as well as giving you a
percentage it should give you a result
that places you somewhere in the country
in it in a town or a city but I was
maybe a day's work to put that all
together most importantly the game had a
big button that let you share your
results now I should point out that we
weren't doing any data harvesting and
like certain other companies we weren't
asking people to login to Facebook and
share their details with us we were just
using the standard simple sharing
template that just posted a thing to
your wall our mission was just to get
people to visit our site to visit our
projects to pay attention to us our job
was literally to try and be popular on
the internet and asking people on the
login would have gotten completely in
the way of that so it was simple see
your friends
on Facebook or Twitter whatever share
their result find out your own shared on
words that was all gone and we knew
we've got a hit pretty quick after
launch but the numbers kept rising and
rising and rising it at one point we had
thirteen thousand people playing this at
the same time as only took a minute to
play it by four days it it's been shared
on Facebook a million times
not-not-not clicks shared a million
people had decided they were going to
click the button to share their results
to their friends we had made something
relatable no matter if you were northern
or southern proud of it or not proud of
it that quiz gave you something that you
were probably willing to share that
helped that we'd spent a while
calibrating the questions dancers
bouncing cultural references and results
back and forth until everyone had
something they were at least happy with
but lots of people told us that the
result had identified the actual city
they lived in which was basically just a
lucky guess but somehow it seemed better
for them than that some people it seemed
almost spooky anyway if it gave you a
result you didn't like if it was too
southern on to northern all wrong that
would still cause a reaction that was
still fun enough that you might want to
share the results we estimated that even
if they hadn't clicked through a link
like the the name of it had still been
seen by about 10 percent of the British
population it was the biggest thing
we've ever made if I remember right it
was the biggest thing we would ever make
the teacher success there was connecting
with people provides something that
interested in and give them a reason to
show it to others that is the same
reason that people put faces in YouTube
thumbnails human connections the desire
to see and be seen
that's what power sharing alight now
around the same time as the North ometer
went out of the world my youtube channel
was starting to see some traffic for
years I had been ignoring YouTube's
advice about building a channel about
regular uploads and brand identity and I
just use it as a dumping ground for any
of my projects that happen to include
video and usually there were projects
without my face and I was just an
anonymous British voice in the
background but the year or two before
that had started appearing in vision and
the started doing some videos with a
channel called computer file who were
already doing some pretty good numbers
and they were happy to link their
audience to my channel collaborating
with others has to
mutual but it's not just about
subscriber counts or about money it's
about what you can provide the computer
file I provided the expertise and may
provide in the audience so now after
that I would start little series called
things you might not know and that's
where it really started to take off
people connect with people and now I was
on screen presenting now I was putting
out regular videos now there were lots
of similar things to click on a reason
to come back now that I was
collaborating with others
now people realized that this YouTube
channel this thing here wasn't just
wasn't just a thing it was a person
people were starting to subscribe the
first thousand fans subscribers whatever
they're the hardest wants to get back
when I started 15 years ago it was a
case of emailing the right folks of
showing up in our blogs and newsletters
and it was a case of persistence and
perseverance of grinding your way
through I mean it still is at least I
think joke the catch is I don't know
what the right techniques and my places
are anymore I haven't known few years
because I'm out of touch with that now
and those places will be different
depending on who you are where you are
when you're watching this and what
you're making but as you make stuff you
will find it out you will bump into
someone or say oh I should send up the
hell oh I like that I'll pass it on
human connections not spam not cold
calling human connections I'd like to
believe that everyone out there already
has some connections some people who
know you a message board you post on
people you've talked to and comment
thread or whatsapp chat you in our
Facebook group with friends those are
your first steps those are your first
contacts and yes it absolutely sucks
that there are going to be genius level
pieces of work that aren't making it out
those are the groups and mediocre work
that gets lots of praise because it's
from someone well established I'm not
saying that's right or fair and we
should work to change that but that's
the way things are now but there's still
a long way to go let's not forget that a
good part of the reason that things you
might not know took off is that people
are tend to trust a white guy with a
British accent anyway the site I worked
for back in 2013 as versus them it rode
high for a long time on the North ometer
and a lot of similar projects made by a
lot
different people are Twitter and
Facebook and email subscriber counts
continue to tick upwards and the team
expanded we gain more staff members know
the second full-time developer in the
office but while we had some great ideas
and great traffic sustainable growth was
tricky
suddenly there were a lot of social
media quizzes out there I'm not saying
we were completely responsible for the
fan of all those what magical unicorn
are your quizzes that hit Facebook in
2014 but we were certainly in the
vanguard we were popular on the Internet
and the question that everyone has to
ask about any project though is its how
long can it last because as verse of
them survived a couple of years which
was much longer than the initial
experiment that it was designed to be
but the site was sadly never able to pay
its way in the really harsh and
expensive world of corporate media and
even though I'm aware that my current
big project all this YouTube channel can
go away
at any moment so how do you go from just
throwing ideas out there to making it
work a long time part of the solution to
that is up at my destination
I was too late and